Alzheimer's disease right now people
don't think they know what causes it we
don't think it's at all reversible some
people don't even know what the early
signs look like
what say you Dale bredesen to that
assertation well first of all let's put
it in perspective over a million people
have died from covid-19 and about 45
million of the currently living
Americans will die of Alzheimer's
disease so it dwarfs the covid-19
pandemic it's just a little slower as
you know but the reality is we're told
all the time there's you know we don't
know what causes it there's nothing you
can do about it we published a trial
just a few months ago in the Journal of
Alzheimer's disease in which 84 percent
of the people actually got better so we
understand it don't rush past that 84 of
people actually had a reversal of
symptoms a reversal of cognitive decline
which we were the first to publish way
back in 2014 and then we finally got
were allowed to do the trial tremendous
results and we not only saw are
improvements in their cognitive testing
but we also saw improvements in their
MRIs so they actually had larger gray
matter volumes and their hippocampal
volumes which decline even with normal
aging declined less than with even
normal aging so this has not been widely
recognized sorry that was going to skim
over my brain for a second yeah so with
the protocol that we're going to go into
here people decline less than normal
aging so forget the fact that they're
there because they have early signs of
dementia but they're you can actually
slow even normal aging down yes okay so
um Richard we'll get into I think the
punch line that you call the switch
which is a metabolic pathway that's
really fascinating it's been coming up a
lot in my life recently but first just
to orient people to alzheimer's I know a
lot of people are going to be coming to
this video because they're terrified of
it yeah they may have already been
touched by it they have somebody in
their life so speaking for myself my
wife's grandmother died of Alzheimer's
it is terrifying up close and the
thought of like oh hey I forgot where my
keys are do I have Alzheimer's you know
what I mean like Orient people around
that what are realistic early signs that
people can look out for and then we'll
dive into how we start undoing this how
we can reverse that Trend yeah yeah so
the reality is my generation uh the
old-timers now is the last generation
that should fear Alzheimer's it is
literally becoming optional and here's
why I say that if everybody as they get
to 40 to 45 years of age or or so would
simply get evaluated and get on active
prevention then we could prevent this in
nearly all people what does evaluation
look like and the evaluation looks like
three things so what we call a
cognoscopy just like we all know right
when you turn 50 what do you get you get
a colonoscopy could be well when you're
45 40 to 45 area you should get a
cognoscopy and that's three things
number one a series of blood tests and
they're going to be related to what
Rick's expertise what's happening with
your glucose and your fructose what's
happening with your inflammatory
Pathways all the things that Rick's
research touches on fits beautifully
with our theory of what's driving
Alzheimer's disease so you get really
fast breakdown for us what what would be
a short list of things that we're going
to look for In The Blood what do we care
about
well you know from my standpoint it
would be things like insulin resistance
uh measuring uh your plasma glucose or
your fasting glucose level and your a
thing called the Homa test which looks
for insulin resistance
um we'd be looking for features of
metabolic syndrome uh you know do you
have fatty liver do you have like all of
this stuff is Downstream of glucose
right well no they kind of go together
with the glucose I wouldn't say they're
Downstream I would say they're all
occurring at the same time so features
of metabolic syndrome which is obesity
diabetes insulin resistance all these
are risk factors for Alzheimer's
um and uh and diet there's certain diet
foods you know so food's very high in
sugar are associated with an increased
risk for Alzheimer's I'm not saying that
you can't eat sugar I don't want to
demonize it but um I do well so I'm
curious why don't you want to be
demonized sugar well I mean you know
so it's true that sugar is probably we'd
probably do better without it but um so
many people uh you know there's so many
foods that have sugar it's very hard to
completely eliminate it from the diet so
the practicality of unless you go like
on a keto diet it may be hard to
actually
not eat some sugar so so it's really uh
excessive sugar that's the biggest
problem I mean like soft drinks yes we
we can demonize soft drinks I agree with
you people should not be drinking soft
drinks but um you know uh you know it's
very hard to you know even vegetables
have will have some sugar in them and
um you know so I I'm not saying that you
shouldn't eat any sugar but but sugar
and high fructose corn syrup are two
major culprits that probably have a role
in the cause of Alzheimer's okay I want
to push on something that
um I said which is
that this is quote-unquote Downstream of
glucose so Downstream may not be the
right word but everything that you've
listed to my Layman's understanding is
going to be directly related to the
amount of glucose that you consume and
you're being very delicate which may be
the Y stance maybe I'm the fool in this
discussion but all of this stuff is
going to be related to the amount of
glucose that you're in taking to to my
estimation is that an uncomfortable
assertion no I think you're right
actually I'm going to agree with you
that
um so there's there's a couple things
the first thing is that yes obesity
diabetes metabolic syndrome these are
all risk factors for Alzheimer's when we
get to diet
sugar and high fructose corn syrup are
clearly risk factors for Alzheimer's but
so are carbs and so are so is glucose
but carbs and glucose to my Layman's
brain are one and the same if I eat
carbs I'm going to minus fiber I'm going
to have a glucose response in the blood
and as somebody who wears a continuous
glucose monitor a lot I am startled by
things like carrots that will Spike my
blood sugar as if I've eaten maybe not a
donut but it's kind of it's scary how
close the response is well you're right
there's a range with carbs you with some
carbs you know especially if they have a
lot of fiber they don't raise the
glucose as much if you have a glucose
monitor versus a donut and so there is
this kind of scale so the the ones the
foods that particularly Drive glucose up
in the blood are things like bread rice
potatoes cereal you know potato chips
near the top and anything that raises
the glucose up
anything that raises that glucose up
will
um get you into trouble according to our
work on uh that could increase your risk
for Alzheimer's okay so going back to
the cognoscopy so we've got the blood
work just went into some detail I think
you said there were three things so that
was one what are the other two and then
the blood work you also want to look at
inflammatory status so that what do you
check for yeah check for hscrp
hscrp I've never heard of it so that's
high sensitivity C-reactive protein this
is a pentameric protein five of them
together that come out of your liver
when you have exposure to various
pathogens and immunological things
so that's critical and in fact if you
look at Alzheimer's as a disease what is
it what is Alzheimer's you know it's
just a name
the the big finding is it is related to
two major things number one is your
innate immune system so this is the
evolutionarily older part of your immune
system that is a relatively non-specific
phenomenon where it's saying something's
wrong things are bad I've got to go into
in an inflammatory process and
ultimately hand off to the Adaptive
system that now is more specific
these are where the toll-like receptors
and things like that come into play it's
recognizing something's wrong and
amyloid is part of that so the stuff
that collects in your brain over the
years when you get Alzheimer's is there
because you are responding to insults
and then the denominator of this is
energetics so as your energy is dropping
again coming back to the the fructose
story which is why it fits so well with
Rick's research
you're coming back to that and it's
cerebral blood flow and it's your
oxygenation which is why people who have
sleep apnea are at increased risk these
are things I'm checking for in the
cognosis exactly so you're looking at
these pieces so you want to know your
pathogen status is your oral microbiome
full of P gingivalis which is a specific
bacterium which gets into your brain by
the way and your brain responds to that
insult by making what's looked years
down the road is Alzheimer's disease so
it's those two big issues we want to
know so we want to know your
inflammatory status we want to know your
vascular status which is why standard
lipid panels things like that
that's the cognosity that's part one The
Blood Part Two is simple online
cognitive assessment you can do that in
about 25 minutes and it's going to test
your memory your executive function your
processing speed things like that
two-thirds of the people who are heading
for Alzheimer's the first thing that
goes is new memory
so it's laying down of memory as you
know people will say uh you know hey
where are we going tomorrow oh we're
going to you know and and Jody's and
then 10 minutes later they'll say hey
where are we going tomorrow and they're
like yeah we're going to Aunt Jodi's as
I told you 10 minutes ago that's and
that's the kind of common early thing
but then there's we call that the
amnestic presentation
about one-third of people present with
the non amnestic presentation and that's
typically executive function planning
problems with calculating having trouble
figuring out a tip for the first time
things like that having trouble working
your iPhone or a new iPad or things like
that these are all kind of typical of
the non-amnistic presentation these are
more by the way more parietal lobe
functions instead of the usual temporal
lobe functions which are more on the on
the amnestic side
so those are the things that typically
come up and you can pick those up early
with an online cognitive assessment and
then the third part is MRI with
volumetrics you want to if you have
symptoms or if you're doing poorly on
the testing then you want to make sure
to include an MRI and not just a
classical MRI you want to make sure to
get volumetrics so you're looking at the
size of your temporal lobe the size of
your hippocampus the size of your
parietal lobe how does it match up with
other people of your age
okay so there are predictable shrinkage
for lack of a better word that we would
expect to see in certain regions of the
brain based on your age and so if you
see something that's outpacing your age
then now we've got a problem exactly
okay so I would like to add something
here so um you know when he talks about
the cognoscopy when Dale does
um I I can point out how this sort of
fits in with Alzheimer's in general so
you know originally when people think
about Alzheimer's they think of amyloid
plaques they think of these Tau protein
neurofibrillary Tangles these are
characteristic histologic findings if
you actually like do an autopsy on a
patient with Alzheimer's the brain
shrinks there's neuronal death and
there's these classic findings and
that's why for Years everybody was
calling this a disease of amyloid
plaques we're going to treat those
amyloid plaques we're going to try to uh
either dissolve them or prevent them and
all these treatments came out and most
of them don't do very much they you know
there are some that may have a little
bit of benefit but we're not really
winning the we're not winning the war
and so so that made people look for the
next level you know what maybe it's not
the amyloid plaques maybe it's something
that occurs before that and I just want
to point out that Dale's cognoscopy
testing is looking for those things that
are occurring early and there's really
three basic areas which we just talked
about one is metabolic do they have
insulin resistance is are they
overweight are they eating the foods
that we know are not healthy for you
like high glycemic carbs a lot of carbs
a lot of sugar a lot of salt that's also
associated with so one is metabolic and
then the SEC and insulin resistance and
high glucose is a major part of because
in the brain of patients with
Alzheimer's one of the earliest changes
is insulin resistance of the brain how
do you test for that
well I I know how to do it in a in a
mouse is it destructive though like yeah
so what happens is the brain
um the regions of the brain that uh
require that use insulin to help take up
glucose okay so insulin is a hormone
that helps cells take up glucoses of
fuel and the classic insulin sensitive
tissue is the scallop muscle and the
Scala muscle uses insulin to help bring
take glucose into the muscle to give it
fuel
in the brain the we we used to think the
brain was largely uh insulin insensitive
uh you know glucose can go into the
brain freely without insulin well it
turns out that's not true there are
regions in the brain that like that re
that use insulin to help bring in the
glucose and those areas become resistant
to insulin
in early Alzheimer's and so you can do
things like pet scanning and things like
that to look for glucose uh utilization
and if there's an impairment in glucose
utilization in other words the brain's
not metabolizing the glucose well you
can actually measure it and um and so so
metabolic is one of these three
characteristics that you're looking at
and the other two just real quickly is
the second one is inflammation and
systemic inflammation is now known to be
a major risk factor for heart disease
Paul ritger brilliant scientists at
Harvard has done all these work where he
measures C-reactive protein this is the
same test you're doing the hscrp if it's
more than three normal is like less than
one if it's over three it means that you
have inflammation
you have systemic inflammation you may
not have a fever your why count may be
normal you may feel fine but there's low
grade inflammation in your body and
that's also seen frequently in people
with metabolic syndrome so the CRP is
like the perfect test uh Paul Ricker
believes that everyone should have that
test done if you have an elevation in
CRP it increases your risk for heart
disease it increases your risk for um
for hypertension it increases your risk
for kidney disease and I believe it's
inflammation is well we know that
inflammation in the brain is one of
those early findings of Alzheimer's and
I'm I don't know for sure but I think
C-reactive protein has it been looked at
for as a risk factor for Alzheimer's
yeah yeah and it is so yeah anything
with increasing inflammation yeah so so
that in the cognoscopy score that Dale's
using he's looking for inflammation
which because we know inflammation in
the brain is an early finding he's
looking for metabolic changes like
insulin resistance because we know
insulin resistance in the brain is is
occurring and the other one is energy
status
energy there's there's really two kinds
of energy there's the energy that we we
actively make and we're using it so that
I can talk to you and you can talk to me
and we can if I need to escape I'll run
out that's how that doesn't become
necessary myself but but that that
energy is ATP that is the currency that
is what uh our bodies make and uses as
uh the way we we use energy we use ATP
and that's the active energy but there's
also stored energy and stored energy is
fat you know and um and so when you eat
food which is a calorie Source we make
energy and some of it is ATP and some of
it is
fat fat and you know typically we try to
refill our ATP and then the extra goes
to fat and and this is how normally it
works and so uh we usually have good ATP
levels but what has been discovered in
Alzheimer's is that ATP levels the
energy and the neurons in neurons is is
low
early on you can show it drop in ATP and
it gets worse as Alzheimer's progresses
so our brains don't you know the neurons
do not they're not taking glucose up as
well
which is the fuel and they're not making
as much ATP so the brain goes into a low
energy state
exactly and Tom you mentioned earlier
you know how do you check in a human if
you've got insulin resistance in the
brain as Rick was saying and some very
nice work from Professor Ed getzel out
of UC San Francisco showing that if you
look at neural exosomes you can
literally look at tiny fragments of
cells these are about 100 nanometers
little fragments of cells that break off
from cells throughout your body in the
brain these actually traffic through the
blood you can isolate them and you can
actually measure the insulin resistance
he's published this 50 years ago blood
test you can do it in a blood test now
the this has been a research tool it is
it's coming online but it's not yet
commercially available but you can so I
can't go to my doctor yet you can't go
to your doctor yet and ask for that but
it's coming
pet scans yeah and so one way to do that
exactly and it goes exactly with what
Rick was saying what is the signature
for Alzheimer's when we as neurologists
look at a brain you see temporal and
parietal reduced glucose utilization and
so you know it fits perfectly with this
notion that you are dealing with an
insulin resistant State and the brain is
simply not using this but it's also
interestingly not using the only other
fuel it can use which is ketones
so you have a real Energy emergency
State when you have cognitive decline
you're not able to use the glucose
because of the insulin resistance you
you actually can look at differences in
signaling but you're also not able to
produce and utilize ketones because one
of the things that prevents you from
making ketones is a high insulin level
so it's going to worst in both worlds
yeah okay so uh let's recap where we are
because I think that this is really
important and I think this is going to
take us into now needing to talk about
the switch and what's actually going on
here
okay so as somebody who for a very long
time I had I was hyper inflamed I
probably I didn't understand that I
always thought it was kind of funny but
you could take your fingernail and write
your name in my skin and my skin would
just welt up and my dad had the same
thing and I obviously didn't realize hey
this means you're gonna die young uh was
not that sharp unfortunately and as I
got older though and I didn't put two
and two together I started having
chronic wrist pain and I had burn marks
on the back of my hands for years
because I was icing them so often that
it was like leaving this little burn
mark and I then met Peter attia and Don
degasino and they said oh dude you've
got to be eating fat like this is crazy
because I was doing what I'd Now call
rabbit starvation
basically the vast majority of my
calories were coming from protein I was
in taking as little fat as humanly
possible because fat makes you fat right
so I was convinced uh and I already I'd
gone low carb years before that
so I thought well I'm low carb my diet
is clean like I couldn't like I assumed
my wrists were like a genetic problem
and when they said hey you need to try
going to being able to be metabolically
flexible and produce ketones uh so try a
high fat diet and stay low carb but
actually go moderate protein as well
let's see now I hated it because I got
keto flu I did not do it well but my
wrist pain went away in like three days
did you measure your uric acid I didn't
I don't think I'd heard of uric acid at
that point unfortunately yeah because a
very high protein diet can raise uric
acid now normally we don't think of the
uric acid as being that much of a
problem but
um in when you're on a keto diet or when
you're on a low carb diet but it can
when it gets high enough it can cause
inflammation like big time and it can
cause gout yeah and uh but it can
represent like with wrist pain knee pain
ankle pain before without having a
complete uh
inflamed attack because when you're on a
keto diet or low carb diet you're
there's a the ketones actually suppress
inflammation to some extent so you can
have kind of like a pseudo you know you
have gout but I mean you have a high
uric acid and you may have problems with
it but you may not actually manifest
full gout because the ketones are
anti-inflammatory okay so let me press
on that so are you saying that by being
on a ketogenic diet which I will Define
as a diet that elicits a 0.5 millimol or
or higher Ketone distribution in the
bloodstream
so you're on a diet that produces that I
could still be high in uric acid yeah so
ketones actually so there's this really
interesting aspect so uric acid is
generated from sugar you know eating
fructose which is like in table sugar
and it's also in high fructose corn
syrup so you can get a high uric acid
from eating carbs you know that contain
fructose
but you can also make uric acid from
protein and um and it's not as much of a
problem if you're on a low carb diet
because one of the things your acid does
is it acts to convert glucose to
fructose it's like a it it can generate
fructose in your body but if I didn't
realize until research you're on a low
carb diet you don't have that much
glucose around to convert to fructose so
the uric acid
you know isn't quite as dangerous in a
person on a low carb diet it can often
go up though to eight or nine or even
higher but there are many cases of
people on low carb diet who will develop
gout interestingly the you know it's not
usually as a serious an attack of gout
as you know and when a person's on a
normal diet with carbs and stuff and
that's because the ketones are
anti-inflammatory if you had to Ballpark
me how many
um grams of protein so I'm about 185
pounds how many grams of protein would I
have to eat to be in that state because
my gut instinct and you gentlemen are
going to strike me dead if I'm wrong
here but my gut instinct is you could
never eat enough protein to be
considered high protein and stay
ketogenic like you'll get kicked out if
I eat too much protein I'm boom I'm out
of ketosis yeah because the protein some
of it gets converted to glucose yeah so
am I crazy or is is my vision of high
protein like so ultra high as to be
nonsensical so so it turns out that the
when you're on a ketogenic diet the uric
acid goes up for two reasons one is the
high protein but the other is the
ketones actually block the excretion of
uric acid so they it goes up from both
unfortunately so it's very very common
for people on a keto diet to have
um you know a uric acid of seven or
eight or nine whoa but then over uh
several months it will tend to come down
it will tend to come down do you
consider a ketogenic diet how healthy or
unhealthy I think that in general
they're fantastic diets even though uric
acid can get that yeah so this has been
the Paradox because uric acid does go up
and so for people that don't know about
uric acid give them a quick primer
because I'm reacting like it's the
devil's Brew so give people a quick
primer I think of uric acid as bad part
because of your work so uh give people a
primer on what uric acid does yes
so uric acid is a substance that's in
everybody's blood we all make uric acid
from when we break down energy or uh
when we break down DNA or RNA it's
basically nucleic acids when they get
broken down they make uric acid and then
we have to excrete it humans have to
excrete the uric acid through the kidney
or the gut other animals actually can
degrade uric acid because they have an
enzyme but we lost that enzyme 15
million years ago and we had a mutation
and I think it's actually plays a role
in some of the problems we have today
but but anyway that as a result uric
acid tends to be higher in humans
because we don't degrade it and we have
to excrete it through the gutter or the
kidneys so like a uric acid and a mouse
or you know maybe a level of one and the
normal level in a human is around five
so we have a much higher level and when
you go on Western diet it actually goes
from about three on a hundred gatherer
diet to about five on a western diet and
then when it gets to seven which is when
you start eating a lot of sugar
shrimp and beer you know this
sounds good to something wrong
shrimp and beer it's quite the uh but
anyway when you start eating a lot of
foods that can make uric acid then what
happens is you're because we don't
degrade it it can get up to seven or
higher and when it once it gets up to
over seven it can cause the disease gout
and gout is this really painful disease
it affects maybe nine million people in
the U.S and it's an arthritis and it it
usually causes red hot tender joints and
systemic inflammation the C-reactive
protein goes up
um you know you can have a low-grade
fever during attack and even after the
attack most people with high uric acid
show evidence of systemic inflammation
there C-reactive proteins frequently
High it stays High and the reason is
because these are tax are from crystals
of uric acid that the deposit in the
joints and they don't really go away so
the attack goes away but the crystals
are still there and they cause this
low-grade inflammation Reese recently we
discovered that they can also deposit in
the blood vessels and there's now there
was a paper in Jama showing that like 70
percent of people with gout have some
urate crystals in their aorta or their
coronaries and it correlates with
increased risk for heart disease so Paul
ritger has been saying you know
inflammation is a major cause of heart
disease and the truth is that high uric
acid can cause inflammation and a p even
when you're even when you don't have an
attack of gout and so uh and and but but
what's interesting is if you go on a
keto diet you uh so a lot of fruit a lot
of uric acid comes from the sugar from
fructose and uric acid actually
amplifies is made when you metabolize
fructose you make uric acid but then
uric acid helps convert glucose to
fructose in the body so it's like a
cycle a vicious cycle so when you go on
a low carb diet you break that cycle to
some extent because you're not eating so
much carbs but you the problem is
ketones block the excretion of uric acid
so your uric acid can still go up so a
real problem is that you know high uric
acid you know is associated with heart
disease It's associated with obesity and
diabetes uh and but the the complicating
factor is that um
keto diets which generally helps block
obesity and diabetes can still raise
uric acid so the question is can you say
that ketones block the secretion of uric
acid so how how is it going up if
ketones are blocking it
uh so ketones black the excretion of
uric acid and the tubules of the kidney
so you can't get rid of the uric acid so
it goes up in the blood oh oh I see what
you're saying it stops us from getting
it out yes exactly from getting it out
and so and and it usually only lasts you
know for the first few months but there
are some people who continue to have a
high uric acid and and when you say that
you had evidence of inflammation high
uric acid causes inflammation it causes
pain in the wrist so I was just thinking
that maybe you were one of those people
who had a uric acid of nine on that diet
and the the issue is though is remember
the key the ketogenic diet is what
caused my inflammation to go away right
so so I had it during my rabbit
starvation okay so ketones are
anti-inflammatory so uh several people
that I've collaborated with are looking
at you know for example Ben bickman
maybe you've interviewed him yeah so
Ben's uh doing some studies to show that
when the uric acid goes up on a keto
diet that it's fairly innocent because
uh the ketones are anti-inflammatory and
can block the pro-inflammatory effects
of uric acid so uric acid is mainly this
thing that causes inflammation
and um and you know ketones block
inflammation so it's it's sort of like
the way to stop it so your uric acid can
go up if you're on a keto diet you may
not suffer from the inflammatory effects
of uric acid
uh so so that's what we're thinking but
there are many cases of people who still
get attacks of gout on a on a low carb
diet I actually I don't know so much
about a keto diet but so that you know
it's a balance of a good guy the ketones
and a bad guy the uric acid and so which
one dominates could could be important
but in general a low carb diet and a
keto diet are are diets I recommend in
general aggressively critical
distinction here so many people get this
wrong a keto diet versus a plant-rich
keto diet it makes all the difference so
for brain health you want a plant-rich
ketogenic diet with appropriate periods
of fasting so you want to get the
ketones up you want to have the low carb
diet but you don't want to have just a
pure meat diet why is that so I'm ultra
high I get most of my calories from meat
so if you're gonna so change my life
right now I want to hear about it so
what what is the difference how how does
it work mechanistically let's change
your future for the better absolutely so
first of all as you probably know there
are now increasing reports coming back
from people because of this carnivorous
approach with ketones who are end up
ending up with vascular disease and
ending up with heart attacks and strokes
so controversial or like when you go and
talk to somebody who's hardcore uh
carnivore uh obviously they paint a very
Rosy picture I will say anecdotally and
yes I understand the limitations of
anecdotes but anecdotally every time
I've tried to go primarily plant-based I
don't feel good so now I've never looked
at oh maybe I'm just doing it wrong
maybe I just need to supplement but I'm
always skeptical of anything where I
have to supplement to get where I need
to be yeah so what is happening when I
intake meat what's happening or if it's
no meat isn't an additive problem it's
you're missing something what am I
missing or vice I think it's a good
point the the pure carnivore diet where
that really works well is for people who
have a tremendous amount of inflammation
and whether it's related to the lectins
that Steve gundry likes to talk about or
whether it's related to something else
that you're responding to you know
that's person of you know that's
personal uh it may be different for each
person but if you look for example at
apoe4.info this is 3 500 people who are
apoe4 positive this is a common risk
factor for Alzheimer's disease about 75
millionflammatory do we know yes because
well for other reasons as well it
doesn't allow you to get rid of amyloid
as well but yes the the predominant
issue there is it is and of course as
Rick will tell you it also has to do
with fructose but it is a
pro-inflammatory gene it is at the
primordial apoe and it's interesting
because it was different in our uh in
our ancestors so that the simeons as we
became the the hominids between five and
seven million years ago
the initial was we were all apoe4
homozygous for 96 percent of hominid
Evolution we've all been apoe44 which
today confers about a 70 lifetime risk
for Alzheimer's it's the major it's the
dominant way we've got 75 million who
have a single copy in this country we've
got about 2 million uh sorry about about
almost 7 million two percent of the
population in other words that has uh
two copies and they're at very high risk
for Alzheimer's disease and so the the
the point here is that they have to be
careful about a carnivorous diet because
they tend to jump up their their LDL
particle numbers they tend to jump up
their triglyceride to HDL ratios and
they're at high risk for heart attacks
and strokes now again if you're going
after inflammation and you don't have
issues with your vascular status then
it's probably fine to have a carnivorous
diet but for most people and certainly
for Alzheimer's disease the
phytonutrients just take one of many
polyphenols alone High polyphenol
associated with lower Alzheimer's
disease take the risk you know we've all
heard so much about lecanumab which was
supposed to be this miracle drug it's
it's the only really the only one of the
anti-amyloid antibodies that seem to
have an effect what it doesn't make you
better it doesn't keep you the same it
slows your decline in Alzheimer's in the
early stages by 27 percent
now what does better than that bill
multi-billion dollar drug extra virgin
olive oil alone did better than
lecanumab can I add that to a high meat
diet
and get the same effect you can
certainly add it to a high meat diet but
you have to remember that you're missing
the polyphenols you're missing the
phytonutrients you're missing the high
fiber now what do you do for fiber
well so I do eat vegetables it's just
that I would say 65 to 70 of my calories
come from uh eggs and animal protein I
guess that is animal protein uh meat and
then the remaining 30 to 35 is vegetable
matter okay so at least you're you're
staying away from the high carb which is
great I don't touch carbs my diet is
very what I call clean I'm always
looking to improve but so I eat a lot of
eggs I eat a lot of red meat I eat a lot
of
um pork I eat a lot of fish
um
beef I never say that so those are the
like my Mainstays and then I cycle
through maybe 10 different vegetables
okay
um and lots of extra what are your
Ketone levels Lots uh I'm not on a
ketogenic diet now so I can feel though
when I click in probably I could tell
you if I hit .7 I might miss a 0.5 but
I'm so because I intermittent fast a lot
yeah uh and I tracked religiously my
intermittent fasting over an 18 month
period and it came out to be about 17
and a half hours and that includes
weekends holidays everything just over
the the whole time about 17 and a half
hours so I mean some days I'm going 19
20 hours right uh so at that point I'm
going to kick over to ketosis uh so I'd
be at a
0.5.75 somewhere in there and I can feel
that so I would say right now I can tell
you I'm not in ketosis uh just because
it's a weekday so I probably only did 16
17 hours Great point and okay and do you
know your apoe status I don't so this is
in fact I want to ask you more about
this so if for however much of our
evolutionary past we were double apoe4
yeah and 96 as well so what has changed
now is it diet is it some other genetic
mutation that makes apoe for or is it
that we live longer that makes that such
a problem why aren't monkeys having an
issue with this so interesting monkeys
have a different apoe and they're so
there were multiple mutations between
the chimp for example between between
our common ancestor and the first
hominids and so we picked up a specific
mutation
which is an Arginine actually instead of
a threonine and you have a what uh what
Professor Robert Maley who discovered
apoe has termed uh a a domain
interaction so if you have apoe4
your apoe looks like columns on a house
basically it's held together because you
have a positive charge interacting with
a negative charge however then just
about 220 000 years ago so relatively
recently in terms of overall Evolution
apoe 3 appeared and then just 80 000
years ago apoe 2 appeared and these are
less pro-inflammatory so guess what
you're not as good at fighting off you
know you eat raw meat that's got
microbes in it you're not going to be as
good at fighting off the infections with
an apoe3 exactly and also you don't do
as well with starvation again comes back
to Rick's work with with fructose and
with this approach that you're taking in
periods of starvation but it gives them
less inflammation so that they tend to
live a few years longer and they have a
much lower likelihood of Alzheimer's
disease and what's changed is the way we
live what's changed is what works
exposed to in our homes with with mold
and mycotoxins the sugar that we're
eating just that the just you know
Rick's research these are the things
that have changed we are we are not uh
we don't have the same sort of uh intake
of plants we we do have a lot more
carnivory so all these things have have
changed and that's why you know you may
be in perfect shape and you can
certainly check that out with a
cognoscopy see where you stand with your
metabolism with your vascular status and
I don't know if you've looked at your
carotids or you've looked at here but
it's been seven or eight years yeah so
so you know if your vessels are looking
good
um and and you've probably seen these
pre-nuvo scans you can look now your
whole body to see if you have any early
tumors you can look to see whether you
have uh early changes with your
microvascular status in your brain these
are good things to know um
okay so uh we have inflammation
obviously playing a huge role your diet
is really uh particular what I want to
start getting into now let's bring it
all together with the switch why this
matters how it ties to uh Alzheimer's so
what is the switch yes so the switch
refers to a biologic change in which uh
an animal suddenly starts to gain weight
uh become insulin resistant and develop
features of metabolic syndrome it's it's
an actual biologic change so normally
animals try to maintain their weight at
a you know regular weight if you feed
them extra food if you put a tube down
their mouth and force feed them and then
you take the tube off they'll go right
back to their normal weight if you fast
them for two months and then you stop
fasting them they'll go right back to
the weight they should be at that time
of the year I mean it's amazing animals
regulate their weight beautifully and we
probably did two but we're not doing it
now and the when we were trying to
figure out you know what this what what
triggers this change and you know it's
most noticeable
and like animals that are preparing for
uh hibernation or for a long distance
migration you know the bear will
maintain its weight during the summer uh
you know can eat more one day you'll eat
less the next day you know it just
maintains itself and then about eight
weeks before it hibernates suddenly it
changes its Behavior it gets hungry all
the time thirsty it starts foraging for
food it becomes insulin resistant it
starts eating a lot more than it
normally does it can gain 10 pounds a
day whoa yeah it they have a contest to
take a picture of the fattest bear on
the internet and in the fall because
they get really really fat these
hibernating bears before they hibernate
they they want to put on that fat and
then when they hibernate they will not
eat you know they'll go to sleep and
they'll not eat for like six months they
won't drink water and they use that fat
to produce energy that they they live
off their fat so fat is a good thing in
nature you know my book nature wants us
to be fat you know talks about this but
but the fat they when they break down
the fat it isn't just the energy that's
produced uh the ATP but the the fat also
produces water so when you break down
fat you're producing water so so uh this
switch is this switch going from a point
where you're regulating your weight till
suddenly you're gaining weight and it
was all meant to be a survival mechanism
to help the animal uh in preparation for
a time when there may not be food around
and so the question is you know what
triggers that switch and it turned out
you know from our work we we're
convinced that the major trigger is
fructose and fructose is a sugar uh it's
in
fruit and honey which we think of as
healthy but it's also in table sugar
it's in high fructose corn syrup and
table sugar half of the table sugar is
fructose and half is glucose and we eat
a ton of sugar and we eat a ton of high
fructose corn syrup so we get a lot of
our fructose from added sugars maybe 15
of the average American diet is sugars
but these uh the the we also can make
fructose as I mentioned earlier
and we can make it in every organ
including the brain and the thesis for
what causes Alzheimer's is that it's
fructose production in the brain that's
causing Alzheimer's and you make
fructose
from glucose that's the only way you can
only make fructose from glucose so when
you're in a high carb diet you're making
fructose all the time and especially
high glycemic carbs because uh when the
blood glucose goes up that really
converts that triggers the conversion to
fructose you got more substrate you know
to convert the glucose to fructosis
there's more glucose there's going to be
more fructose meat and the and salt
turns out to activate that conversion as
well so it turns out that salt can
increase fructose production and red
meats have been Associated these Umami
foods they can help convert the glucose
to fructose and so red meats salt why
red meat because they contain purines
that raise the uric acid and the uric
acid can help convert glucose to
fructose so you got you got you got two
major mechanisms you so the when you
make fructose you make it from glucose
so high carb diets are
you know a big way to get it but then
salt and red meat uh can trigger the
conversion of glucose to fructose now
I'm going to answer uh you know your
question is red meats okay for you
uh and you're not you're not on a high
carb diet so
you know red meats are associated with
Alzheimer's red there are a couple
papers that show increase red meat
intake is associated with Alzheimer's
that's scary for people who are on a
carnivore diet but it may not be true
for people on a carnivore diet because
we according to our work it's the
fructose that causes the problem in the
brain it's not the red meat and the red
meat makes uric acid
which may not work very well to convert
glucose to fructose in a low carb diet
because you don't have a lot of glucose
around now if you're eating a lot of
protein where you where you're making
enough glucose maybe that becomes a
problem but but in general
um you know this might answer your
question this issue of you know is red
meat bad plant products are probably
probably better in general for you know
on the regular diet
but if you're on a carnivore diet you're
not eating a lot of carbs
you may not have that it's conceivable
you may not have that problem probably
don't very interesting and if I remember
right salt is the same way yeah so if
you're eating a lot of salt right and
you have glucose in your system then
that's going to be converted but if you
have salt but no glucose then the odds
are it won't yes
absolutely that's why salted french
fries and salted pretzels and salted
potato chips are so bad because the
carbs the potato chips gives you the
glucose the pretzels give you the
glucose
but the salt helps convert that glucose
to fructose and it will do it in the
brain we have given high salt diets to
animals and we can show an increase in
fructose production in the brain
so and um and there's a
a Dr Sherwin at Yale who gave glucose
and just infused glucose in people
and if he brings the blood glucose up we
know it gets converted to fructose and
he showed in people that it that a brain
fructose levels go up you can just see
it like after about 40 minutes an hour
the fructose levels start going up in
the brain that is scary because uh our
work suggests that that is could drive
Alzheimer's it's not been known for a
long time that diabetes increases the
risk for Alzheimer's but you know if you
do if you can control your diabetes Well
and keep that blood sugar low you're
going to reduce your risk significantly
it's I don't think it's diabetes that
causes uh you know Alzheimer's uh but it
the high glucose converts to fructose
and I'm just going to say one thing here
when you talk about Alzheimer's that's
critical you're also talking about
mental performance so the things that we
do to prevent you from getting
Alzheimer's make you sharper there's no
so it's not you're not just talking to
people worried about Alzheimer's and
then the other the third piece of this
is that you're also talking about people
who've had covid-19 where you know that
so many people get get brain fog and it
turns out unfortunately that many of the
mechanisms are in parallel and it's
already been shown that people who
developed covid-19 are at increased risk
for developing Alzheimer's whoa so the
things that you're talking about today
are for people worried about Alzheimer's
or for people who want to think better
on a day-to-day basis and for people
who've had covid and want to make sure
that their brain fog doesn't ultimately
slip into degeneration so this is a
widely applicable situation you're
talking about here
okay that's super terrifying yeah and I
think that you've found in your studies
that insulin resistance is a major risk
factor for Alzheimer's and counts for
maybe half of the patients are very
common of course metabolic syndrome
there are about 80 million Americans or
so who have metabolic syndrome it's
incredibly common and that includes
insulin resistance so it's just what
you're saying the way we live the things
we're exposed to the foods the ultra
processed foods that we're eating these
are these are all what are colluding to
give us such a common way to die through
Alzheimer's about 15 percent of the
population dies from Alzheimer's and as
I said no idea it was that high yeah so
the fact of the matter is it's it should
be optional and for your generation you
know the the most the vast majority of
people should be able to avoid this
problem through the very things that
you're talking about today um
so that brings us to fructose uh we know
we're eating a ton of it we know we're
converting a ton of it given the things
that you just taught us
um
Thai fructose for me to the bear it
certainly was between the lines and what
you said but I'd love for you to make it
explicit the the idea of a yearly cycle
for anybody that's ever heard like I eat
fruit but only in season I was always
like what the what does that mean yeah
so walk us through that so so you know
we we think of fruits as healthy and in
many respects they are healthy and I
recommend fruits but if you eat a ton of
fruit and I mean a ton
you can get a lot of fructose that way
so fructose is the sugar in fruit and
bears in the fall will start eating
thousands of berries and they'll they
they love honey too and they search it
out but they it's mainly berries that
they eat they can eat 10 000 berries in
a 24-hour period people have counted the
seeds in the scat and
um anyway when you eat that much
fructose you can activate the switch and
it's not the fructose that makes you fat
it's that fructose makes you hungry and
fructose then you then and it causes a
thing called leptin resistance where you
can't control your appetite
and so so I know there's a but in the
paper you guys break them all out so
you've got hunger you've got leptin
resistance yep foraging
stimulates foraging uh so fructose does
is that different than hunger yeah so
hunger is you you're searching I mean
hungry as you you want to eat but
foraging is the process of going out and
searching for the food we'll talk about
foraging in a bit because it's it's the
key
it's the key uh uh Insight that led to
this hypothesis hmm and see that coming
okay so hunger leptin resistance
foraging uh it's also decreasing your
ATP production
yeah so what what happens so to break
down the switch
the first thing is it stimulates hunger
and thirst
both
and it stimulates foraging where you
have to go out and and search for food
it also stimulates uh food intake and
actually it uh it it's it's
blocks satiety this feeling that of
fullness so that you keep eating that's
the leptin resistance yes
so you eat more than you should it
blocks the break in within the cell it
has this unbelievable trick that it does
and the trick it does
is that it lowers the ATP you're eating
calories you think your ATP levels
should go up
but remember energy is both stored
energy and active energy and what it
does is it stuns the mitochondria the
mitochondria the energy factories that
make ATP
so they turn the mitochondria down
and ATP production by the mitochondria
goes down
so where does the energy go it has to go
to the stored energy which is fat
and it blocks the breaking down effect
to replace the ATP so the ATP levels
stay low for quite a while like if you
drink a soft drink I can do an NMR of
your liver and your ATP levels are going
to fall and they're going to stay low
for for a while until they eventually
recover and during that time you'll you
know it stimulates hunger foraging and
and it's blocking the the oxidation of
the the breaking down of the fat so the
fat accumulates calories are going into
the fat but you're not breaking it down
so the fat stores go up
ATP levels stay low the 18 low ATP
levels are like this alarm signal hey I
don't have enough energy
I'm a in a low energy state I'm going to
eat more
because my my bodies tell me that I'm in
a low energy state
and so uh your blood pressure goes up to
help maintain circulation pressures go
up in the kidney to help facilitate
excretion because it thinks that you're
under attack I'm under attack and that's
what fructose does it's the only
nutrient the only nutrient that lowers
ATP in a cell
all the other nutrients do
increase the ATP but glucose is still a
culprit you're right because what
happens is when you eat fructose very
little gets to the brain
but fructose stimulate fructose and
glucose either of them stimulate
fructose production in the brain so
although if I label a fructose molecule
in this sugar and I eat it most of it
gets removed by the liver
and the gut
and the circulation very little of it
gets to the brain this was you know the
Trap how yet fructose production goes up
in the brain when you eat sugar and it's
from both the glucose and the fructose
and the glucose is the more important
one I think actually I don't know which
ones they're probably both equally
important but you're right when the
glucose levels go up and when you're
insulin resistant you are making
fructose in the brain
talk to me about the insulin resistance
in the paper this plays a pretty
fascinating role in terms of what's
going on why why would insulin
resistance ever be evolutionarily
advantageous yeah so so it's pretty
complicated but uh I'm gonna break it
down to two things so first off there's
the insulin resistance in the muscle
so there's and then I'm gonna talk about
insulin resistance in the brain okay so
uh so when you eat fructose you wanna
it's it's it sets off an alarm signal
that says hey I'm under attack
and so uh and and I need to get food but
I need to conserve my energy
so the way the body does that is it it
stimulates foraging which requires
energy right so you have to go out and
find the food that's going to cost
energy so it drops the resting energy
the resting energy metabolism when
you're not doing anything drops
and so animals will kind of huddle
they'll kind of like become couch
potatoes
you know because when you're not at when
you're not doing anything you kind of go
to a lower energy State and this helps
conserve energy so it's all about the
the animal thinks it's running out of
energy so you you when you're not
exercising or you're not foraging your
energy goes down and when when you are
forging you can maintain the energy you
need
okay and and and insulin resistance has
a role in dropping that resting energy
because your skeletal muscle uses a lot
of energy
and when you become insulin resistant
the muscles not taking up as much
glucose because uh it requires insulin
to take up the glucose so you become
insulin resistant you lose the muscles
kind of going into a low mode State low
energy mode and unless you're like
foraging and then it will use it what
it's got
um and then
also the glucose levels will go up in
the blood because there's less going
into the muscle
and there's certain regions of the brain
that don't require insulin
and they can use that glucose to help
think and thinking is critical if you're
going to survive you know if if you go
into energy uh you know drop your energy
needs you still want to be able to think
it through
so that's how the systemic works now in
the brain it's an amazing mechanism
and that is that fructose
does also causes insulin resistance in
the brain and if you give fructose to an
animal
they get remember the three things that
we talked about with Alzheimer's the
earliest one is inflammation
fructose if you give fructose to an
animal they get inflammation in the
brain in the same sites the hippocampus
which is the memory centers
the second thing is if you give fructose
to an animal they get insulin resistance
in their brain that you can prove
and they and they also get mitochondrial
remember how fructose blocks the
mitochondria and suppresses the ATP you
see that when you get fructose and it's
in the same sites where Alzheimer's
occurs so the three characteristic of
Alzheimer's which is low energy low ATP
mitochondrial suppression insulin
resistance and inflammation these are
all what fructose does
not just systemically but when you get
fructose to an animal it happens in the
brain and if you raise glucose fructose
goes up in the brain and you see that
you can reboot your life your health
even your career anything you want all
you need is discipline I can teach you
the tactics that I learned while growing
a billion dollar business that will
allow you to see your goals through
whether you want better health stronger
relationships a more successful career
any of that is possible with the mindset
and business programs in Impact Theory
University join the thousands of
students who have already accomplished
amazing things tap now for a free trial
and get started today
so so that's really interesting so what
why would we want the brain to become
insulin resistant
and this was the Twist and thank you uh
Dale and thank David perlmodern our
discussions with uh uh other
neurologists as well to try to
understand this but it it turns out that
foraging
is a specific behavior that requires
activating some regions of the brain and
inhibiting others it's uh it isn't like
hey I'm just going to go out and you
know find a deer you know it isn't quite
like that so to forage you you actually
uh have to develop exploratory Behavior
it's it requires you to go into areas
you may never have been so you had
there's an exploratory component
you have to be able to move fast so that
your locomotor activity you you have to
just keep going you can't take too many
breaks because you got to find that food
you have to have good visual cues so
that if you're looking around and you
see a piece of food you know something
that you can eat you you catch it you
and the visual cues have to light up you
know some people if there's a piece of
cake in the room you find it immediately
you know then I have that activated at
all times yeah I know where those
chocolate cookies are you know
um anyway so the visual cues had to and
then there's certain regions like you
have to
decrease your self-control you don't
want a lot of self-control a lot of our
cortex is involved the frontal cortexes
you know says it tells you you know
um I don't want to go into that cave
because there's there could be a line in
there but you don't want to have that
much self-control because if you're
trying to find food for your life you've
got to be brave enough to go in there so
bravery impulsivity uh you know short
attention you have to scan things around
you can't deliberate if you deliberate
and focus on one thing for a long time
you're going to miss everything so it
turns out that there's regions of the
brain that are important for attention
deliberation self-control impulsivity
and and certain regions of the brain
there's this one region of the brain
that you stimulate it and animals forage
and that uh if you give fructose to an
animal or fructose you know you you know
this this is involved in forage and if
you
um if you give fructose to a human
they've actually shown that the frontal
the blood flow to the frontal cortex
goes down
blood flow to the temporal and cortex
blood flow to the hippocampus goes down
it's trying to reduce the activity there
and um and also it's associated with you
know uh impaired glucose utilization in
these areas
in insulin resistance in these areas so
the fructose is working to create
insulin so there's less fuel going in
there's less fuel utilization it saves
energy 20 percent of our energy is from
the brain so this is another way to
conserve energy but at the same time
it's it's reducing our self-control uh
allowing us to be more impulsive and uh
allowing us to forage so great state to
be in if temporarily you need to go be
in beast mode get as fat as you can
because you're about to hibernate but
really atrocious if we leave that switch
on all the time which is what we're
doing now so Dale walk me through so we
we have this evolutionary
Advantage which allows us to survive
this seasonal cycle where we know there
are going to be times of Plenty and
there are going to be times of lack and
so we have to be able to survive the
times of lack so by break taking our
metabolic efficiency by leaving some of
the glucose in the bloodstream so it can
be used to store fat by triggering the
desire to go forage and all that all
good in a sort of micro moment why do
they lead to alzheimer's when the switch
is left on yeah great point and you know
I just come back to what Rick was
pointing out a minute ago that foraging
you've got you know one of the most
common things that happens with
Alzheimer's patients is they wander
that's why they put signs on the back of
these patients and what do they do they
wander off and you say what are you
doing oh I'm trying to go home or I'm
trying to do this or I'm trying to do
that well this is foraging Behavior
Jesus so so what happens is that very
this is very much analogous to the issue
of stress that is then resolved versus
chronic stress we all know that you get
a little stress
it is hormetic you actually get this
hormetic response where you do better
with ongoing stress and then it's
resolved then you have some stress and
you're now you know you're making more
stem cells you're responding a little
bit about it you do this exactly now you
do this and you just keep it chronic
which is the big problem chronic stress
now you've got hypertension now you've
got Neurosis now you've got all these
things and I think Rick has made a
really good point of this that this is
ultimately what Alzheimer's is your body
has responded to insults and we've been
interested for years in all the
different insults you've got to look at
what's driving that innate immune system
and where that actually is that's got a
memory that's in your endothelial cells
of your blood vessels it's in your
tissue macrophages so that's the
microglia in your brain and it's also in
your bone marrow so you're now hyper
responding to things like covid-19
and you can drive that up by things like
by by eating saturated fats
by not having enough polyunsaturates by
salt all these things so what we see as
Alzheimer's and this is why it's so
relevant for the way how sharp you are
on a day-to-day basis this is the end
result of these ex of these responses to
stress so we are stressing ourselves out
repeatedly over the years with our
exposures with our eating of fructose
basically we are driving a system Beyond
its evolutionary design
you know we again we were not made to
eat a lot of sugar and we're doing it
it's just like you know jumping out of
it of a window from the second or third
story you might survive a few times but
you do that you know 10 times a day for
50 years you're going to have some major
major rheumatologic and orthopedic
problems so we are triggering this thing
and unfortunately that we're actually
making each time you activate your
innate immune system which you can do
with fructose each time you're turning
down your mitochondria just as Rick was
explaining your body makes a little
amyloid what is it there for it is there
to respond to insults it it's really
interesting stuff It Coats the bacteria
it actually is antibacterial
anti-parasitic antiviral it's an amazing
molecule it's actually there to protect
you but part of that and this is what I
was asking Rick about last night because
to me this is the billion dollar
question why is it that your body has
brought together the thing that is your
innate immune system that is responding
to these insults trying to help you but
it's put that together with reducing
your energy and literally downsizing
your network
and that is the surprise here that your
body hasn't evolved a way to say I can
get rid of the P gingivalis or the
herpes simplex another by the way
another common uh contributor to
long-term activation of your innate
system people who treated their
outbreaks in Taiwan had an almost 80
percent lower likelihood of developing
dementia just striking results
a size simple acyclovir valet cyclovir
things like that and that works because
it's taking it's it's reducing the
amount of time that the brain is under
assault basically exactly so you're
reducing the thing that's actually
driving your innate immune system to
stay on and I think do they have to
treat that chronically or is that like
if they have a flare-up they typically
we're doing with flare-ups but yeah so
some people will do it if they're having
a lot of flare-ups they'll do it
chronically so what's happening is
you're seeing a system that has defended
itself quite successfully you can see
people with massive amounts of amyloid
in the brain who are still quite normal
cognitively it's when this stuff is now
giving these the older numbers you're
taking these big lakes of amyloid and
you're now making the oligomers from
that it's a little bit like taking
troops and sticking them in a fort as
long as they're in the fourth they're
not out shooting and killing the
populace but when you open the fort when
you're now continuing to to poke the
bear basically you're now going to be
bringing these things out that are both
downsizing and protecting and you're
you're basic your body is your brain is
making a choice saying I've got to fight
these Invaders so I'm going to live with
a smaller brain I'm going to live with
fewer synapses and it's the loss of
synapses that is the big problem we're
losing our processing speed we're losing
our ability to lay down new memory and
the interesting thing is this is a
program your brain is deciding look you
in your life have done all these
wonderful things you've got enough to
live successfully for years so if you've
got to give up something if I said to
you tomorrow tom you can wake up and
either have not able to store you're not
able to store new memory or you're not
able to speak calculate do your job
that's an easy choice and that's the
choice your brain is making
woof
okay so
what is going on it's that makes it
shrink back it's under assault I get
that but why is the solution to not form
new memory is it just resource
allocation it doesn't have the resources
or yes so you are not your supply and
demand is now mismatched so you are you
you know you can put your resources into
fighting the pathogens or you can that's
where the inflammation part comes in or
you can put it into things like your
mitochondria building synapses making
and keeping your memory and this is why
getting rid of those problems having the
extra virgin olive oil keeping your
inflammation low keeping your fructose
low these things are all so critical for
you to be at your best when you are
making and keeping new synapses making
and keeping new memories so talk to me
really fast about the polyphenols what
what are they doing are they protective
against something or are they giving me
a building block that I need yeah so
there are several mechanisms but they
are to some extent they're having an
anti-inflammatory effect and they're
supporting your mitochondrial function
what Dale has talked about is that there
are probably multiple mechanisms leading
to Alzheimer's and there's infections
toxins it's known that like a concussion
can increase your risk and
um you know genetics and you know and uh
what I've been saying is that fructose
may have a dominant role interestingly
fructose could be playing a role in this
pathway life with concussions and toxins
too because the enzyme the chemical
reaction to make fructose is turned on
under almost on many stressful
conditions it doesn't require you to be
uh you know it isn't just diet
so for example mild dehydration
concussions cause low oxygen it causes
what we call hypoxia contusion you the
blood vessels aren't delivering as much
blood oxygen so you get the brain kind
of swells a little bit with a concussion
that will stimulate local fructose
production it that's why well because if
you you think of fructose as trying to
be a survival pathway so when it gets
turned on what it does is it turns on
inflammation to try to fight off deal
with the toxins or whatever
it tries to reduce the energy in the
cell to conserve you know if you have
impaired blood supply you're not getting
the nutrients so to to the brain it's
like a starvation state so what you want
to do is you want to reduce your energy
needs and if you stun the mitochondria
the mitochondria use a lot of oxygen
and when you when you stun the
mitochondria your oxygen need goes down
acutely
and you you're not record you know
everything goes into a low power mode so
you're making less energy but you don't
need you're trying to go into a low
energy mode where you that you you your
metabolism goes down and it it turns you
you were talking about how metabolism
gets turned down it isn't just the the
uptake of glucose but the enzymes
involved in glucose metabolism fat
metabolism they all get turned down
everything goes into a low power mode
we're trying to protect we're under
attack we're going to start inflammation
we're going to reduce our energy needs
and we're going to survive this attack
and that happens with a concussion may
happen with toxins that covid actually
one of my friends measured the
mitochondrial changes in Long covet it's
the same signature as fructose we just
don't know if the long covet stimulates
fructose but it's the same signature the
apoe4 is also you know the suppression
people who have that they suppress their
mitochondria they increase their
glycolysis again it's the same Sigma
signature it's like a survival pathway
so whether or not that involves fructose
I don't know yet but but I do know that
fructose activates the survival pathway
it's turned on under low blood flow
oxygen low oxygen infections viral
infections you know herpes simplex
they may also be able to induce this
Activation so it could be one it could
be one main pathway and that is
converged on by all these toxins and so
forth and what you're doing is you're
going I'm going to look for all these
I'm going to look and treat the
infection I'm going to look for vitamin
deficiencies I'm going to look for all
these things that might cause stress and
um and also I'm going to look at insulin
resistance and all these things and so
you are making great roads
incredible achievement to to slow down
Alzheimer's and um and our work is a
hypothesis that says that all these
things may work through fructose e to
eventually cause these changes I'll tell
you one thing if you give sugar water to
an animal
a lab rat after about four weeks they
have trouble walking through a mace they
have trouble getting through a maze
their brain starts to shrink
they get the mitochondrial problems they
get the insulin resistance in the brain
they get the inflammation of the brain
all published
and if you take about 18 weeks they
start getting amyloid plaques cow
protein in their brains in the
hippocampus
probably
it's you know fructose probably can be
said to be a cause excessive fructose to
be a cause of Alzheimer's I think we
could probably say that based upon these
experimental datas if you take people
who have Alzheimer's and you at autopsy
measure their fructose levels in the
brain five to six fold higher than a
normal person whoa yeah that's a
significant
and you come back to the switch you know
just to say but there's a switch in your
brain that you've talked about here but
your brain is literally switching and we
see this we we study this more through
the amyloid precursor protein uh
signaling but it's the same story your
brain is literally switching from a mode
of building and maintenance we can make
new synapses we can learn new things we
can you know we can build new Bridges
basically it's now switching to a mode
that is all about protection and
downsizing as Rick said it's a low power
mode it's saying uh oh tough times could
be ahead we're now going to use our
resources to fight potential pathogens
to deal with toxins but we're going to
live with fewer synapses so that is a
switch and you can see it by the way
when you study app signaling you
literally go from cleavage at at one
site to cleavage at three sites and then
what happens this is amyloid precursor
protein which is the protein that sits
in the membranes that is going to give
rise to the amyloid which is a tiny
peptide fragment of that overall protein
and this thing is a switch you can
literally go back and forth between this
maintenance and and building mode into a
protective mode so it fits beautifully
with Rick's theory of how this works
through the fructose related Pathways
and and the incredible thing is once you
kind of understand this you can actually
design
uh management plan to prevent
Alzheimer's which you've already done
actually what you're doing is reducing
fructose production in the brain through
all these different measures you know
reducing high glycemic carbs polyphenols
some of them actually block fructose
metabolism you know there's ludiolin and
ostol are are polyphenols that can block
fructose metabolism to some extent wow
this is really coming together for me uh
I'll so much so that I'm going to
um I'm going to recontextualize my
initial statement at the beginning of
this so at the beginning of this I said
uh this is all Downstream of glucose but
the reality is what I'm hearing now is
that glucose just happens to be the way
that we put our body brain specifically
in the context of Alzheimer's but it
just happens to be the way that we most
frequently put ourselves in the I'm
under assault I need to go go into low
power mode but the reality is there's a
many different let's call it four or
five whatever ways that we can put our
brain and body in the I need to go into
low power mode I need to protect I need
to survive this insult so from a brain
perspective it could be a concussion
from a brain perspective it could be
diet glucose from a brain perspective it
could be a virus it could be bacteria so
anything that's going to put our body
into that hyper defensive mode where I'm
left with the decision to survive this
or to make new memories and when I have
to figure out whether I can walk and
talk or I make new memories I'm going to
always choose the walk and talk which is
why and this is terrifying people with
Alzheimer's turn into basically a zombie
and it's like they're not there but
they're still alive there meaning the
person that I knew and loved is no
longer present but the reality is that
they've just so chronically been in low
power mode that everything is offline
yeah now you hinted at this and you said
it out right at the beginning it sounds
like then there are things that we can
do to get out of low power mode and
while I can only imagine that the longer
you stay in it the more damage is done
that we're not going to be able to
unwind
that we can start unwinding some of this
what does that look like what would a
protocol be yeah that's a great point
and you know the one of the most
exciting things is seeing people who've
been told that they're going to die
there's nothing they can do they have
Alzheimer's that they actually get
better and we had people in the trial
going from mocha scores of 18 or 19
which is that is out of 30 where you
have significant Alzheimer's two perfect
30s doing very very well just striking
improvements and and the most common
thing we hear is that the spouse says
you know they're so much more engaged
suddenly the the synapses are firing
again and they are starting to interact
so what it looks like is very much what
Rick was saying you're we are looking
for all the different contributors
because they are different from person
to person but again as Rick has pointed
out you could argue that the most common
the most common insult that our brains
are undergoing is glucose and fructose
related but we do see people where it's
about their uh their their oral hygiene
we see people where it's about leaky gut
where again as Rick has pointed out
fructose plays a role we see people
where it is about living in homes full
of mold and the mycotoxins things like
trichotheses and okra toxin a and
gliotoxin these affect your immune
system as well as your nervous system so
there are as you said there are many
ways to give yourself these insults and
unfortunately the big problem with this
disease and all chronic illnesses is
that they go on for a long time before
we recognize it so part of the medical
Revolution here is for people to do more
with things like wearables where we're
seeing oh wait a minute you know my
heart rate variability is changing you
mentioned CGM earlier so continuous
glucose monitoring great if you're going
off scale and by the way we see the
other half of that as well people who
are eating high carb diets go to bed
wake up at four in the morning with a
glucose of 45. they've gotten
significantly hypoglycemia off of a high
carb diet oh absolutely because you get
the Peaks and The Valleys you now get
the insulin coming out and you drive
yourself into these I mean into
hypoglycemia which is horrible for your
brain as well
okay you want to identify those and
address so so our protocol that we
developed is about identifying the
drivers and then what's causing
addressing the drivers yes so we're
we're addressing the inflammation so you
have a standard questionnaire or is this
where we get into the blood test yeah so
yeah we do have a standard questionnaire
and we look at uh right now we look at
150 different variables But ultimately
it will be whole genome and it will be
epigenome there's some great tests that
are now available that haven't been
available before
phosphotal 181
phosphotal-217 these are literally
looking at your brains pulling back
because when you phosphorylate your Tau
and tau is like the bolts if you're
building out a piece on your studio
you'd be putting out Rafters and then
bolts on them to keep them stable the
the tau is what stabilizes your
microtubules and when your body is now
pulling back what it does is it sticks a
phosphorylation group on the towel which
pops it off and allow allows your
neurites to collapse so you're literally
looking at that what's ongoing but
you're now looking at it in your
bloodstream you can also look at things
like things like gfap which is another
blood test these are all now available
neurofilament light is another one and
these proceed so it gives us the ability
to look earlier to say ah you know Tom's
brain is not doing what it should be he
has to worry 10 or 15 years down the
road so what do we do for these people
we identify what is causing do they have
inflammation so what we did we
identified as you know we identified six
different subtypes we say so Pete there
are people where it's a predominantly
inflammatory disease and you know these
may all go through fructose I don't know
yet I'm fascinated to find out we see
people who have more of an atrophic mode
so in other words they're just very low
in all their supportive elements
estradiol testosterone pregnenolone
progesterone thyroid vitamin D all these
things the bet gets to the energy
component of this then there are people
that have what we would call glycotoxic
where they've got a high Homa IR they
are very insulin resistant then we have
people who have a toxic where they're
exposed to either biotoxins inorganics
or Organics air pollution as you know
lots of interesting work on air
pollution increasing risk for cognitive
decline and for Alzheimer's disease and
then we have people where as Rick said
it's concussion related this is where
you have traumatic and many people it's
a combination of those things these are
all insults to which you have responses
so we identify those things and then if
you've got pathogens we want to get rid
of those and then of course we want to
heal your gut we want to give you a we
want to give you metabolic flexibility
so you were asking before you know
ketones people do better when they have
Ketone levels above 1.0 millimolar BHB
how often we've seen at least once per
day okay and so but when we do that then
what we do is the key is to make the
metabolically flexible so you're in good
shape because you're able to go in and
out you're able to use glucose when you
need it and you're able to use ketones
when you need it and you're not having
these high levels of glucose and you're
not having the hypoglycemia because you
don't have a high carb diet so those are
all critical pieces to get people
metabolically stable and that's when
they do the best and it's interesting
when people start having energetics
they've got the ketones on board they're
able to utilize glucose again they start
to get better they start to perk up and
then we have to make sure that their
innate system is not being activated now
one of the things as I mentioned earlier
the innate immune system one of the
places it stores memory is in your
endothelial cells so both with covid and
with Alzheimer's you're ending up with
these micro thrombi and micro infarcts
that over the time really take a toll on
you you see this all the time with the
MREs I say I store memory what do you
mean is it a damaged cell or a cell that
now reacts in a different way so you
literally reprogramming the cell so it's
not necessarily damaged you don't have
to wait that long you're reprogramming
it to be more thrombotic so you're
reprogramming's blood clotting yes your
your Repro you're basically making it so
your platelets are stickier you're not
rolling your blood along these nice
endothelia the way you should and so you
end up with a higher risk for these
micro infants so one of the things we do
is to treat that and to prevent people
from having these microthrombi we get
their innate immune systems to quiet
down and relax with things like well you
bring down the for the blood vessels you
can use things like nattokinase and
pycnogenol easy to use are these drugs
these are actually supplements you can
get over the counter yeah you can get
these over the counter and then of
course so there's one that's called
nattokinase and there's one that's
okinase and you can get it by eating
natto I mean the other one is called
pycnogenol
and I again I don't you know we never
recommend that people just go out and
try these things willy-nilly you know
talk to your uh practitioner we've
trained over a 2 000 practitioners now
to do this protocol from 10 different
countries and all over the United States
um and then for the innate system part
great things like Omega-3s SPM activism
is a resolving
um so resolvins uh uh discovered by
professor Charles searhan at Harvard a
number of years ago a very interesting
molecules they are Omega-3 cousins
basically that help you to resolve
ongoing inflammation we now want to tame
that innate system and we want to bring
up your energetics those are the two
critical pieces and in so doing of
course we also want to get rid of the
pathogens that are causing this to be
chronically activated
Rick were you about to say something
yeah I I was just going to say that a
lot of uh what you're talking about this
uh you know trying to improve the energy
in the cell uh improve metabolic
flexibility that's exactly what happens
when you remove fructose you know so uh
fructose you know causes metabolic
inflexibility because it's blocking the
fat from being broken down to the ATP
it's suppressing the glucose uh
metabolism through the mitochondria so
if you can improve if you can re reduce
fructose production or or intake you can
have a theoretically have a lot of these
effects including on the endothelium I
mean it's just it's really uh so it's
very it grounds me when you when you
talk about your your approach which is
to a very personalized medicine approach
where you're looking at each area and
then really trying to knock it down I I
can see fructose is a commonality across
the board and you know my
um my recommendation is that everybody
should try to eat healthier and
um Define healthy and what I mean by
that is
uh because we we can show that this
pathway is associated with aging too I I
have knocked out this fructose pathway
in animals and they stay leaned old
they're smart they they uh don't develop
uh kidney disease or heart disease or
liver disease with age it's or it's very
mild
um and you know and their mitochondria
stay healthier so you know I think that
this is a general this fructose pathway
is generally a problem that's involved
in a lot of diseases aging and so forth
so from my standpoint I would
cut out soft drinks because of their
sugar content
because they have glucose and fructose
they they are concentrated they have a
huge amount of glucose and fructose
um diet soda okay diet soda would not
activate this pathway but it does make
you still like sweets so you know
um what about fruit juice fruit juice
you should not drink fruit juice but
natural fruits are totally fine because
the intestine removes about three to
four grams of fructose and so
um you you can eat a fruit and very
little fructose gets to the liver and
um I would say that uh natural fruits
are good because they got all your
flavonols they've got vitamin C vitamin
C actually counters some of the fructose
effects everyone should take Vitamin C
500 milligrams twice a day it really
we're going to come out with a paper
showing how this thing enter how Vitamin
C interferes with fructose it's really
terrific we should be eating a little
bit of fruit uh vitamin C I don't you
know to counter fructose so
um cut out reduce sugary Foods re read
labels reduce high fructose corn syrup
reduce processed foods they're filled
with salt and sugar you know Ultra
processed get rid of you know try not to
eat those
um try to not eat a lot of really salty
foods if you're going to eat something
salty drink a lot of water with it so
that it doesn't activate this pathway
water when you get thirsty you're
activating the switch
because talk to me a little bit more
about water so I I am wildly ignorant on
the topic but I have a gut instinct the
way that people tell you to drink water
does not make sense to me from an
evolutionary perspective we just would
not have had that much access to water
so the thought of drinking like you know
a liter of water every hour or whatever
the prescriptions are it seems crazy to
me am I off track here you're off track
because because we're not living in a
survival mode right now we're we're
living with processed foods and high
salt foods and salted chips and you know
back when in the hunter-gatherers they
they didn't have to drink so much water
because they they weren't eating all
this food with salt in it we are raising
so when you eat salt what happens is the
there's a salt concentration in our
blood and you can measure everybody who
gets a blood test when they see the
physician almost everyone will get what
they call the electrolytes and sodium or
n a is the test for your water balance
your salt water balance if you're eating
a lot of salt but not drinking a lot of
water
then the sodium will be high
and if the if you're drinking a lot of
water and not so much salt
then your sodium will tend to be a
little low and a normal range is like
from 135 to 145. and everyone said hey
that's normal I don't care if the sodium
is 144 I don't care if it's 137 but now
people are studying it a little bit more
and there was just a big paper and if
you're serum sodium is on the Lower Side
meaning you're drinking more water so
it's like 136 to 140
you will have a much better Outlook in
terms of lower risk for heart disease
obesity diabetes dementia aging then if
your sodium is like 144 so even though
they're in the normal range the doctors
won't tell you this but there's already
data there the studies are out we need
to drink more water and if I take an
animal and I
give them a high carb diet they get fat
if I put them on increased water
that reduces that increase in serum
sodium
and that is associated with less
fructose production
and they I can block obesity and
Diabetes by just increasing water intake
we polished it uh in a very good Journal
and so uh it turns out that these people
who are running around drinking eight
bottles of water a day is probably a
good thing because what they're doing is
they're keeping their serum sodium down
so they're reducing the conversion of
glucose to fructose because remember a
high salt concentration
in the blood stimulates the conversion
of glucose to fructose uric acid does
too but salt is one of your best ways to
do it so that's why salted french fries
are bad so if you're going to eat french
fries drink water first to bring your
serum sodium down your serum salt
concentration down so that you don't
activate the switch when you you're
eating the fries because the sodium will
go up but not to the point where it will
convert you know it's better to drink
water in the beginning of a meal
uh than in the end of a meal
interesting you want to lower the sodium
before you intake the next absolutely
yeah yeah okay so do you have a
prescription on how much water yeah it's
all relates to how much salt you know if
a person's not eating a lot of salt you
don't need to drink a lot of water if
you're eating a lot of salt or you're
working out out in the sun and you're
you're sweating a lot you're going to
need salt and water
and you just need to make sure but but
here are some tricks if you look at your
urine which maybe not not everyone
chooses to do but really if your urine
if it's dark yellow
it means that you are D partly
dehydrated it correlates if the urine is
totally clear like water you're
overdoing it you don't need to drink
that much you want it to be like just
slightly yellow you can also go to your
doctor and get a serum sodium and you
want your sodium to be like 138 to 140
maybe 142 but you don't want it higher
than 142 and that means you're not
drinking enough water
um you know and uh
I always put in this caveat when I talk
about this but if you're a marathon
runner you do have to watch how much
water you drink because there are these
people who get you can intoxicate if you
drink gallons of water and on marathons
when they get really dehydrated they'll
keep some of them will keep drinking
uh a lot of water and then the serum
sodium can fall and they can they can
get sick you can have seizures so you
you know if you have any concerns talk
to your doctor measure your serum sodium
But A good rule of thumb is eight
glasses of water a day uh is for the
average person's really good eight to
ten glasses it would be about right we
want to have about two and a half liters
of urine a day most people have about
one and a half liter and that would be
that that would be good
where do hormones fall in all of this
like as somebody who's rapidly
approaching an age where I will very
seriously consider trt
um this is play a role in this is that
uh one of the things where the body's
gonna respond negatively where I go into
low power mode or it doesn't matter
there's a lot of good things about
testosterone I mean it can raise your
blood count it can sometimes raise blood
pressure can lower your wouldn't that be
bad uh you know it depends if your blood
pressure goes up a lot usually it
doesn't raise blood pressure very much
usually it doesn't raise the blood count
that much but occasionally it can
usually it doesn't lower well it does
lower HDL cholesterol I mean so there's
some negative aspects about it but a lot
of people feel better on it
um I haven't really studied it in terms
of what it does to fructose metabolism
so I I don't know Dale are there any
correlations because like my next
question is going to be why do women get
this at twice the rate that men get it
so the hormones play a big role in
Alzheimer's disease and that's well
studied rapid drops for example there
was a very nice study that came out of
the Mayo Clinic a number of years ago
where they simply looked at women who
had lost their ovarian function
typically they threw you know one reason
or another
they had lost ovarian function at the
age of 40 or younger they doubled their
risk for Alzheimer's even though the
Alzheimer's didn't announce itself and
didn't get diagnosed for many years
after that if you went back clearly so
that one of the hypotheses is that it's
this precipitous fall and so yes men are
less likely than women women make up
almost two-thirds of the patients with
Alzheimer's just as apoe4 positive is
also about two-thirds of Alzheimer's uh
and so they are about 65 as Maria
Shriver has pointed out time after time
this is a woman-centric disease uh and
about 60 percent of caregivers as well
so one of the thoughts is if you have a
precipitous drop in your estradiol and
progesterone you are literally taking
that energetic taking those those
changes away and by the way in our work
in the lab you can literally trace the
molecular Pathways estradiol binds to
receptors estrogen receptors and that
then enter the nucleus and change the
transcription of genes so change the RNA
made from hundreds of genes and one of
the ones that it up regulates is the one
that cuts the amyloid precursor protein
at the good place that actually gives
you the things that say Okay memory
formation memory maintenance so you
precipitously drop that and you're again
you're pairing back on your synapses
people who then go on bioidentical
hormone replacement
tend to do better
with the highest value and testosterone
and similar effect but of course when
you go through andropause as opposed to
menopause you tend to go down more
slowly and the thought is that that may
be one of the reasons by the way
progesterone also a critical in detox
what happens we saw amazing when I was
detoxing from like metal detoxing from
all anything that where you're using
your glutathione and detox Pathways
Organics inorganics and biotoxins when I
was training in neurology back way back
in the 1980s we never saw people in
their 50s with Alzheimer's we would see
we thought of it as a disease of older
people 60s 70s 80s 90s we now know it is
a disease of your 30s 40s and 50s that
gets diagnosed 20 years later I thought
you were saying we're seeing it in
people in their 30s well so what we are
seeing is one of the most common
presentations we see now is a 52 year
old woman and it's typically associated
with menopause or perimen menopause and
the current thought is
you're exposed to these toxins over time
and you are sequestering them in your
bones in various places you're also
detoxing and then you go through What's
called the osteoclastic burst about a
seven year period where you have dropped
your hormones and you're now releasing
some of these from the bone you're now
undergoing bonuses
exactly well you don't have osteoporosis
yet but you're releasing these back into
your circulation so you're now exposed
to these toxins and we see presentations
all the time with people and we want to
of course we want to get them as early
as possible help them to detox get them
they'll respond very well to
bioidentical hormone replacement as an
overall part and then also to detox and
the progesterone is an important player
in the detox
so walk me through sorry I just wanted
to add to the the female question
um so it's known that uh with menopause
when estrogen levels fall that there is
an increased frequency of obesity and
diabetes and chronic kidney disease they
all go up uh not just Alzheimer's but
the risk for Alzheimer's but all in
general metabolic syndrome uh and
cardiovascular risk all start to
increase in the woman following
menopause and start being closer to
males in many respects like heart
disease and so forth and there are
different theories for it but one one
interesting one in addition to the all
the wonderful mechanisms we're talking
about is that estrogen keeps uric acid
levels low
so uh in in young women they will tend
to have a uric acid lower than men and
and that's why gout is really a disease
of men more than women but following
menopause uh uric acid levels come right
up and uh
become equivalent to the male and the
risk for gout goes way up and if uric
acid we believe is playing a role in
causing this uh
pathway in Alzheimer's that fructose and
uric acid are working together one could
argue that the increase
in and the other thing which I haven't
told you is that although women are
protected uh
the for the same level of uric acid the
women show up worse effects so women
have a lower uric acid before menopause
but if if you take female cells and male
cells and compare them with uric acid
you know basically are there's there's
evidence that women are more sensitive
and show a greater uh consequence for
the same uric acid so when their uric
acid goes up following menopause they
they won't just catch up they make can
bypass you know in terms of these
metabolic effects so one one possibility
is that that that is involved in in this
Alzheimer's response to besides the
Direct effects of estrogen on amyloid
and so forth and then while we're on
uric acid we should mention the
excellent book by our co-author yes and
friend Dr David Perlmutter uh yeah
called drop acid excellent book so yeah
I had them on to talk about that it was
the first time that uric acid really got
put on my radar that's let's keep
pushing on uric acid so
what role is it is it the ambulance at
the scene or is it actually driving the
problem
well most of these things I would I
would definitely defer to Rick he is the
uric acid expert but you know these
things are mostly biological signaling
is often in Cycles just as he was saying
earlier you know it's part because it's
changing mode you're literally changing
you're switching from one mode to
another mode so it is both it is driving
it but again
you where it's like it it's helpful in
the beginning
uh I guess that wouldn't technically be
you but basically it's good in one
circumstance and then it's terrible in
another
yeah so the way that we kind of looked
at that was uh we were curious why
humans have higher uric acid levels and
um and so as I mentioned you know most
animals have an enzyme called uricase
which degrades uric acid so most mammals
have a uric acid of like one or they
produce it but they get rid of it yeah
they produce it and they get rid of it
and we lost that enzyme 15 million years
ago so just uh as um you know when I was
studying I have a long ass time like
when I think about us compared to most
animals not all animals but most animals
we live longer obviously we've become
the dominant apex predator so did we
lose it or did we get rid of it we got
rid of it like in a good way I'm saying
it was a good way back then and so let
me try to explain how how that works so
scientists now can figure out when a
mutation occurred
and the mutation occurred around 12
million years ago and uh and you know so
I was wondering what where were we as
humans 12 million years ago and this is
actually pretty human when when there
were ancestral Apes that were the um
they were the ancestors for not just us
but for all the great apes
and uh I found out that the these Apes
had originated like around 20 million
years ago in Africa and they were in
East Africa and they were frugiverus
meaning that they ate fruit they lived
in the trees they lived off fruit
and they were very successful and you
know within a few million years there
was like 20 different species of eight
today there's like four or five HC or
four species or whatever
and then and then what happened was uh
there was a change in weather and global
cooling began and it was the polls
increased with ice and the sea levels
fell
and so it's sort of opposite is what's
going on today
and uh Africa had was actually an island
uh you know there was no connection with
Europe but as the water levels fell
a land bridge formed that allowed
animals in Africa to migrate into Europe
and uh lots of species migrated
elephants rhinos ant eaters and primates
these early apes and they ended up in
Asia Minor and in Europe and there was
it was still warm enough that there were
fruit trees all year round uh in those
areas and so they the Apes didn't have
to change
uh their their diet at all it was still
the same and then
global cooling continued
and uh and in Europe those fruit trees
started becoming less and there was a
change in the forest and suddenly there
wasn't a lot of fruit during the cooler
season sort of like the winter but it
wasn't true winter it was just a cooler
period of time
and the Apes started to starve and they
they you can show that uh by skeletons
that show that they had these striations
on on their teeth that kind of look like
tree rings and it's a they call it
enamel hypoplasia and you get it during
the growing when the teeth are growing
and and it gets stunted when there's no
food around
and uh there's a very famous
Anthropologist named Peter Andrews who
uh was at the Museum of Natural History
in London and he was studying these apes
and I I figured you know I don't know
much about archeology myself but this
guy does and I'm gonna go talk to him so
I flew to London met with him and he
showed me all the work he did and we
spent uh quite a bit of time together
and uh through the I said could it be
that this mutation may have occurred in
the Apes in Europe he says well
he says uh you let me try to explain to
you what happened and he said you know
our work we looked at this the skeletons
and we realized that it was a European
ape that became our ancestor in the
European ape uh when they were starving
they they didn't all become extincts
some of the European Apes actually
migrated back to Africa but when they
migrated back they took they overcame
the Apes in Africa and so that they came
back because when they when they started
to starve they had to come out of the
trees they had to learn how to walk
around not bipedal but more like knuckle
walking they they had to learn how to
dig up tubers and roots and eat
different foods because there wasn't
enough fruit around
and uh and that was when the mutation
occurred in the and it turned out that
when they came back some went to Africa
and some went to Southeast Asia to
become the orangutan and they all carry
that mutation showing that they came
from a common animal
that was we think was in in Europe so we
realized that maybe that mutation may
have helped them survive when the when
all the Apes were becoming extinct up
there and it might have allowed them to
to make more fat from fructose so what
we did was we took a mouse
or a lab rat actually and we inhibited
urocase so we made it like we mutated we
didn't mutate the eurocase we just
inhibited it
and it's uric acid went up and then we
gave it fructose and we gave another
group the same amount of fructose but
without inhibiting the your case and the
animals where we inhibited your case
become
showed were much more sensitive to Sugar
that's really interesting from a calorie
as a calorie perspective the blood
pressure went up more they've got more
fatty liver even though they're eating
the same amount of fructose exactly and
uh weight gain is driven by calories but
the rest of it is not so the blood
pressure what are you calling the rest
of it sorry insulin resistance blood
pressure fatty liver uh all those things
are independent so they would get fatty
liver without putting on fat correct
interesting yeah absolutely
and then we we actually I worked there's
a guy named Eric Usher who's uh a
molecular evolutionary biologist and he
actually resurrected the extinct Gene
that we lost and we could put it into
cells and we could show that when when a
a human liver cell has your case it
makes
less fat from the same concentration of
fructose and if you not take a human
cell today that does not have the irrit
case it makes a lot more fat do you
inject the uricase uh we uh transfect
yeah we we express the gene in the cells
you can turn it back on is how are you
turning it back we resurrected the gene
by figuring out what the gene was and
then we ex we made it and it put it into
a liver cell I'm saying how are you
getting it into is this a cell in a
Petri dish yes I see I see so not not a
human who is alive into their active
liver cell but what it does suggest is
this mutation was to help us survive
because the mutation
what it did was it raised our uric acid
so that we could make more fat from
fructose because fructose makes uric
acid and when if you start off with a
higher uric acid and you eat fructose
the uric acid that's produced by the
fructose goes up even higher so for the
same dose of fructose the uric acid goes
up much higher and you get a much bigger
switch the by so our switch so it's
really interesting if you take a mouse
and you give it sugar you have to give
it a lot of sugar to make it fat but
humans are much more sensitive to sugar
and this is one of the reasons well very
very interesting how this all comes
together so they'll go ahead you're
inside I'm just going to say so my
interest is okay let's imagine that this
is going to be a the major player that
that fructose is going to be the major
player and and farm is going to go out
and develop an inhibitor prevent this
pathway very little that the human body
does that is to give it disease it's
responding to something in a hopefully
positive way just as you've just
explained with Evolution so my question
is what's going to be the side effects
what do you lose Yeah by losing this
when Pharma comes up and says okay uh
you know okay Professor you know we've
now got something that looks really good
and it's going to help Alzheimer's
disease what are going to be the side
effects of that of that drug
well I there are actually people who
lack the enzyme
and they're it's pretty rare because
they they don't have any symptoms so
it's hard to find them
but the few kindreds that have been
found they don't develop type 2 diabetes
they don't develop obesity
so have we looked at longevity or
anything yeah they they haven't looked
at longevity
um but the the belief is that it's
pretty innocent and um in a modern
context because I can tell you the the
out in the wild perspective is you
starve to death and die so in a moment
of famine your toast whereas myself I
can make seven pounds of fat out of nine
calories so it's like I'm gonna survive
a famine guarantee yeah so exactly that
would be my prediction as if if there
was like a serious famine they're
they're not gonna do as well
um if you block fructose metabolism then
but in a modern context where you can go
to the grocery store yeah not so bad
yeah they might live longer the
prediction would be they would live
longer
so I I think that so long as you know we
have grocery stores filled with 20 000
different food items and and you know
people are will continue to pick the
foods that they want uh sometimes even
when they know that they're not good you
know it might be a beneficial thing to
have an inhibitor hmm
wow very interesting okay so just to
bring this all back around if you have
diabetes you need to figure out or sorry
not diabetes if you have
um Alzheimer's disease you want to
figure out why you have it what is the
insult that's leading to this whether
it's a toxin whether it's your diet
whatever you need to figure out what it
is and then understanding that basically
all of this is kicking off this switch
you're turning on the fructose either
you're in taking it or you're producing
it but either way you've got a fructose
production problem in the brain that is
causing you a problem you're going into
low power mode everything is shutting
down retreating but
you guys are the first ones to give me
any hope that there's actually a way
back out of low power mode and you can
actually see a reversal of these
symptoms which is absolutely
extraordinary what is the next step in
the research Where Do We Go From Here
Yeah critical piece here is that when
you develop Alzheimer's disease you go
through four stages so you have a
pre-symptomatic stage often in your 20s
and 30s where you can already pick up
changes on pet scan you can already pick
up that signature we talked about
earlier with temporal and parietal hypo
metabolism for glucose then you go
through a period that lasts on average
10 years which is called SCI subjective
cognitive impairment where you know
there's something wrong but you're still
able by definition to test in the normal
range and this is the problem the
doctors are telling you yeah you're
getting a little older it's nothing to
worry about well yeah a lot of people
who get older have problems but they
shouldn't and that's the key if you
would if everyone would just come in at
those two stages either get on active
prevention or earliest reversals we
could make dementia a rare problem today
the problem is everybody's coming in on
the last two stages the third stage is
called mild cognitive impairment
terrible choice of terms it's like
telling someone don't worry you only
have mildly metastatic cancer it is a
late stage of what is going to become
Alzheimer's related dementia and
dementia is the fourth agent by
definition that means you've begun to
lose your activities of daily living and
even in our trial we took people with
MCI and early dementia and even then for
84 percent of them improved but if you
could get people early you can get it
closer to a hundred percent so then I
think the next step is to go after first
of all to understand whether this is
present in all the other things when
we're seeing the other pathogens are
these is this all through fructose and
then I think you know this is maybe an
excellent Pharma Target instead of
trying to remove the amyloid which
really is a naive approach and makes no
sense by itself let's try to shut down
the the actual drivers of the decline
again I'd like to remove Upstream what's
actually causing if you're living in a
place that's exposing you to things you
need to address that
um and uh and as we've heard today from
Rick you know quit eating the quit
eating the fries quit getting all that
salt quit you know we Now understand
what are all these things that are
driving this pathway that may be so
common as a critical pathway for
developing cognitive decline amazing
where can people follow you Dave Dale uh
you can look at drudison.com in the
Facebook is Dr Dale bredesen uh and and
same for Twitter and Instagram I mean
then we have a couple of books out uh
the end of Alzheimer's talking about
these sorts of things but of course at
the time we didn't know about about
fructose until Rick's exciting work uh
and then uh in a more recent one the
first survivors of Alzheimer's
tremendous seven stories from people who
got better and they talked about what
they went through amazing Rick where can
people haul you yeah so uh Dr
richardjohnson.com is my website
um and uh I have a book nature wants
this to be fat that includes the
discussion about Alzheimer's and and the
foods that activate this switch uh and
you know I also have a Twitter account
that's
very similar to my website and Instagram
is Dr Richard j Johnson
so
um I do want to say that uh to end this
by saying that you know Dale's work is
actually has Hands-On proof that the
that this kind of personalized medicine
approach Works our work is compelling
but we still have to do we have to take
it from the hypothesis and compelling
out evidence to to actually try to prove
it and so that we still have more to do
but I will say that I think there's
enough evidence that people need to view
diet as one of the most important things
diet and exercise
following all these general rules that
you have been doing and others have been
doing of you know trying to reduce high
glycemic carbs and sugar reduce salt
drink more water I think that this is a
there's enough evidence there that you
know this should be something everyone
should be doing in trying to to stay
healthy and reduce their risk for
Alzheimer's so I love it okay all right
everybody remember that ultimately you
are in control of what you do and it all
has consequences and speaking of things
that you should do if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care peace
click here to learn exactly what you
need to do to prevent Alzheimer's
disease and even potentially reverse it
this woman in front of me my patient her
life is decimated now
her life is decimated now she's in my
office week after week sobbing